II
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE
The terms “spiritual experience” and “spiritual awakening” are used many times in this book which, upon careful
reading, shows that the personality change sufﬁcient to
bring about recovery from alcoholism has manifested
itself among us in many different forms.
Yet it is true that our ﬁrst printing gave many readers
the impression that these personality changes, or reli gious experiences, must be in the nature of sudden and
 spectacular upheavals. Happily for everyone, this con clusion is erroneous.
In the ﬁrst few chapters a number of sudden revolutionary changes are described. Though it was not our
 intention to create such an impression, many alcoholics
have nevertheless concluded that in order to recover
they must acquire an immediate and overwhelming “Godconsciousness” followed at once by a vast change in
feeling and outlook.
Among our rapidly growing membership of thousands
of alcoholics such transformations, though frequent, are
by no means the rule. Most of our experiences are what
the psychologist William James calls the “educational variety” because they develop slowly over a period of time. Quite
often friends of the newcomer are aware of the difference
long before he is himself. He ﬁnally realizes that he has undergone 
a 
profound 
alteration 
in
his reaction to life; that such a change could hardly have
been brought about by himself alone. What often takes
place in a few months could seldom have been accom plished by years of self-discipline. With few exceptions
our members ﬁnd that they have tapped an unsuspected
567

inner resource which they presently identify with their
own conception of a Power greater than themselves.
Most of us think this awareness of a Power greater than
ourselves is the essence of spiritual experience. Our more
 religious members call it “God-consciousness.”
Most emphatically we wish to say that any alcoholic
 capable of honestly facing his problems in the light of
our experience can recover, provided he does not close
his mind to all spiritual concepts. He can only be defeated by an attitude of intolerance or belligerent denial.
We ﬁnd that no one need have difﬁculty with the
 spirituality of the program. Willingness, honesty and open
mindedness are the essentials of recovery. But these are
 indispensable.
“There is a principle which is a bar against all informa tion, which is proof against all arguments and which cannot fail to keep a man in everlasting ignorance—
that principle is contempt prior to investigation.”
—Herbert Spencer
568