179
Tradition Ten
“Alcoholics Anonymous has no opinion on out­
side issues; hence the A.A. name ought never be 
drawn into public controversy.”
NEVER since it began has Alcoholics Anonymous been 
divided by a major controversial issue. Nor has our Fel­
lowship ever publicly taken sides on any question in an em­
battled world. This, however, has been no earned virtue. It 
could almost be said that we were born with it, for, as one 
oldtimer recently declared, “Practically never have I heard 
a heated religious, political, or reform argument among 
A.A. members. So long as we don’t argue these matters 
privately, it’s a cinch we never shall publicly.”
As by some deep instinct, we A.A.’s have known from 
the very beginning that we must never, no matter what the 
provocation, publicly take sides in any fight, even a worthy 
one. All history affords us the spectacle of striving nations 
and groups finally torn asunder because they were de­
signed for, or tempted into, controversy. Others fell apart 
because of sheer self-righteousness while trying to enforce 
upon the rest of mankind some millennium of their own 
specification. In our own times, we have seen millions die 
in political and economic wars often spurred by religious 
and racial difference. We live in the imminent possibility of 
a fresh holocaust to determine how men shall be governed, 
and how the products of nature and toil shall be divided 

T R A D I T I O N T E N
180
among them. That is the spiritual climate in which A.A. 
was born, and by God’s grace has nevertheless flourished.
Let us reemphasize that this reluctance to fight one an­
other or anybody else is not counted as some special virtue 
which makes us feel superior to other people. Nor does it 
mean that the members of Alcoholics Anonymous, now 
restored as citizens of the world, are going to back away 
from their individual responsibilities to act as they see the 
right upon issues of our time. But when it comes to A.A. 
as a whole, that’s quite a different matter. In this respect, 
we do not enter into public controversy, because we know 
that our Society will perish if it does. We conceive the sur­
vival and spread of Alcoholics Anonymous to be some­
thing of far greater importance than the weight we could 
collectively throw back of any other cause. Since recovery 
from alcoholism is life itself to us, it is imperative that we 
preserve in full strength our means of survival.
Maybe this sounds as though the alcoholics in A.A. had 
suddenly gone peaceable, and become one great big happy 
family. Of course, this isn’t so at all. Human beings that we 
are, we squabble. Before we leveled off a bit, A.A. looked 
more like one prodigious squabble than anything else, at 
least on the surface. A corporation director who had just 
voted a company expenditure of a hundred thousand dol­
lars would appear at an A.A. business meeting and blow his 
top over an outlay of twenty-five dollars’ worth of needed 
postage stamps. Disliking the attempt of some to manage 
a group, half its membership might angrily rush off to 
form another group more to their liking. Elders, temporar­
ily turned Pharisee, have sulked. Bitter attacks have been 

T R A D I T I O N T E N
181
directed against people suspected of mixed motives. De­
spite their din, our puny rows never did A.A. a particle of 
harm. They were just part and parcel of learning to work 
and live together. Let it be noted, too, that they were almost 
always concerned with ways to make A.A. more effective, 
how to do the most good for the most alcoholics.
The Washingtonian Society, a movement among alco­
holics which started in Baltimore a century ago, almost 
discovered the answer to alcoholism. At first, the society 
was composed entirely of alcoholics trying to help one an­
other. The early members foresaw that they should dedicate 
themselves to this sole aim. In many respects, the Washingtonians were akin to A.A. of today. Their membership 
passed the hundred thousand mark. Had they been left 
to themselves, and had they stuck to their one goal, they 
might have found the rest of the answer. But this didn’t 
happen. Instead, the Washingtonians permitted politicians 
and reformers, both alcoholic and nonalcoholic, to use the 
society for their own purposes. Abolition of slavery, for 
example, was a stormy political issue then. Soon, Washing­
tonian speakers violently and publicly took sides on this 
question. Maybe the society could have survived the aboli­
tion controversy, but it didn’t have a chance from the mo­
ment it determined to reform America’s drinking habits. 
When the Washingtonians became temperance crusaders, 
within a very few years they had completely lost their ef­
fectiveness in helping alcoholics.
The lesson to be learned from the Washingtonians was 
not overlooked by Alcoholics Anonymous. As we surveyed 
the wreck of that movement, early A.A. members resolved 

T R A D I T I O N T E N
182
to keep our Society out of public controversy. Thus was 
laid the cornerstone for Tradition Ten: “Alcoholics Anon­
ymous has no opinion on outside issues; hence the A.A. 
name ought never be drawn into public controversy.”
TRADITION TEN — long form
No A.A. group or member should ever, in such a way as to 
implicate A.A., express any opinion on outside controver­
sial issues—particularly those of politics, alcohol reform, 
or sectarian religion. The Alcoholics Anonymous groups 
oppose no one. Concerning such matters they can express 
no views whatever.