187
Tradition Twelve
“Anonymity is the spiritual foundation of all 
our traditions, ever reminding us to place prin­
ciples before personalities.”
THE spiritual substance of anonymity is sacrifice. Be­
cause A.A.’s Twelve Traditions repeatedly ask us to give 
up personal desires for the common good, we realize that 
the sacrificial spirit—well symbolized by anonymity—is 
the foundation of them all. It is A.A.’s proved willingness 
to make these sacrifices that gives people their high confi­
dence in our future.
But in the beginning, anonymity was not born of confi­
dence; it was the child of our early fears. Our first nameless 
groups of alcoholics were secret societies. New prospects 
could find us only through a few trusted friends. The bare 
hint of publicity, even for our work, shocked us. Though 
ex-drinkers, we still thought we had to hide from public 
distrust and contempt.
When the Big Book appeared in 1939, we called it “Al­
coholics Anonymous.” Its foreword made this revealing 
statement: “It is important that we remain anonymous be­
cause we are too few, at present, to handle the overwhelm­
ing number of personal appeals which may result from this 
publication. Being mostly business or professional folk, we 
could not well carry on our occupations in such an event.” 
Between these lines, it is easy to read our fear that large 

T R A D I T I O N T W E LV E
188
numbers of incoming people might break our anonymity 
wide open.
As the A.A. groups multiplied, so did anonymity 
problems. Enthusiastic over the spectacular recovery of 
a brother alcoholic, we’d sometimes discuss those inti­
mate and harrowing aspects of his case meant for his 
sponsor’s ear alone. The aggrieved victim would then 
rightly declare that his trust had been broken. When such 
stories got into circulation outside of A.A., the loss of 
confidence in our anonymity promise was severe. It fre­
quently turned people from us. Clearly, every A.A. mem­
ber’s name—and story, too—had to be confidential, if he 
wished. This was our first lesson in the practical applica­
tion of anonymity.
With characteristic intemperance, however, some of 
our newcomers cared not at all for secrecy. They wanted 
to shout A.A. from the housetops, and did. Alcoholics 
barely dry rushed about bright-eyed, buttonholing anyone 
who would listen to their stories. Others hurried to place 
themselves before microphones and cameras. Sometimes, 
they got distressingly drunk and let their groups down with 
a bang. They had changed from A.A. members into A.A. 
show-offs.
This phenomenon of contrast really set us thinking. 
Squarely before us was the question “How anonymous 
should an A.A. member be?” Our growth made it plain 
that we couldn’t be a secret society, but it was equally plain 
that we couldn’t be a vaudeville circuit, either. The chart­
ing of a safe path between these extremes took a long time.
As a rule, the average newcomer wanted his family to 

T R A D I T I O N T W E LV E
189
know immediately what he was trying to do. He also wanted
to tell others who had tried to help him—his doctor, his 
minister, and close friends. As he gained confidence, he felt 
it right to explain his new way of life to his employer and 
business associates. When opportunities to be helpful came 
along, he found he could talk easily about A.A. to almost 
anyone. These quiet disclosures helped him to lose his fear 
of the alcoholic stigma, and spread the news of A.A.’s ex­
istence in his community. Many a new man and woman 
came to A.A. because of such conversations. Though not 
in the strict letter of anonymity, such communications 
were well within its spirit.
But it became apparent that the word-of-mouth method 
was too limited. Our work, as such, needed to be publi­
cized. The A.A. groups would have to reach quickly as 
many despairing alcoholics as they could. Consequently, 
many groups began to hold meetings which were open to 
interested friends and the public, so that the average citizen 
could see for himself just what A.A. was all about. The 
response to these meetings was warmly sympathetic. Soon, 
groups began to receive requests for A.A. speakers to ap­
pear before civic organizations, church groups, and medi­
cal societies. Provided anonymity was maintained on these 
platforms, and reporters present were cautioned against 
the use of names or pictures, the result was fine.
Then came our first few excursions into major public­
ity, which were breathtaking. Cleveland’s Plain Dealer ar­
ticles about us ran that town’s membership from a few into 
hundreds overnight. The news stories of Mr. Rockefeller’s 
dinner for Alcoholics Anonymous helped double our to­

T R A D I T I O N T W E LV E
190
tal membership in a year’s time. Jack Alexander’s famous 
Saturday Evening Post piece made A.A. a national institu­
tion. Such tributes as these brought opportunities for still 
more recognition. Other newspapers and magazines want­
ed A.A. stories. Film companies wanted to photograph us. 
Radio, and finally television, besieged us with requests for 
appearances. What should we do?
As this tide offering top public approval swept in, we re­
alized that it could do us incalculable good or great harm. 
Everything would depend upon how it was channeled. We 
simply couldn’t afford to take the chance of letting selfappointed members present themselves as messiahs rep­
resenting A.A. before the whole public. The promoter in­
stinct in us might be our undoing. If even one publicly got 
drunk, or was lured into using A.A.’s name for his own 
purposes, the damage might be irreparable. At this alti­
tude (press, radio, films, and television), anonymity—100 
percent anonymity—was the only possible answer. Here, 
principles would have to come before personalities, with­
out exception.
These experiences taught us that anonymity is real hu­
mility at work. It is an all-pervading spiritual quality which 
today keynotes A.A. life everywhere. Moved by the spirit 
of anonymity, we try to give up our natural desires for 
personal distinction as A.A. members both among fellow 
alcoholics and before the general public. As we lay aside 
these very human aspirations, we believe that each of us 
takes part in the weaving of a protective mantle which cov­
ers our whole Society and under which we may grow and 
work in unity.

T R A D I T I O N T W E LV E
191
We are sure that humility, expressed by anonymity, is 
the greatest safeguard that Alcoholics Anonymous can 
ever have.
TRADITION TWELVE — long form
And finally, we of Alcoholics Anonymous believe that the 
principle of anonymity has an immense spiritual signifi­
cance. It reminds us that we are to place principles before 
personalities; that we are actually to practice a genuine 
humility. This to the end that our great blessings may 
never spoil us; that we shall forever live in thankful con­
templation of Him who presides over us all.