174
Tradition Nine
“A.A., as such, ought never be organized; but 
we may create service boards or committees di­
rectly responsible to those they serve.”
WHEN Tradition Nine was first written, it said that 
“Alcoholics Anonymous needs the least possible organi­
zation.” In years since then, we have changed our minds 
about that. Today, we are able to say with assurance that 
Alcoholics Anonymous—A.A. as a whole—should never 
be organized at all. Then, in seeming contradiction, we 
proceed to create special service boards and committees 
which in themselves are organized. How, then, can we have 
an unorganized movement which can and does create a ser­
vice organization for itself? Scanning this puzzler, people 
say, “What do they mean, no organization?”
Well, let’s see. Did anyone ever hear of a nation, a 
church, a political party, even a benevolent association 
that had no membership rules? Did anyone ever hear of 
a society which couldn’t somehow discipline its members 
and enforce obedience to necessary rules and regulations? 
Doesn’t nearly every society on earth give authority to 
some of its members to impose obedience upon the rest 
and to punish or expel offenders? Therefore, every nation, 
in fact every form of society, has to be a government ad­
ministered by human beings. Power to direct or govern is 
the essence of organization everywhere.

T R A D I T I O N N I N E
175
Yet Alcoholics Anonymous is an exception. It does not 
conform to this pattern. Neither its General Service Con­
ference, its Foundation Board,* nor the humblest group 
committee can issue a single directive to an A.A. mem­
ber and make it stick, let alone mete out any punishment. 
We’ve tried it lots of times, but utter failure is always the 
result. Groups have tried to expel members, but the ban­
ished have come back to sit in the meeting place, saying, 
“This is life for us; you can’t keep us out.” Committees 
have instructed many an A.A. to stop working on a chronic 
backslider, only to be told: “How I do my Twelfth Step 
work is my business. Who are you to judge?” This doesn’t 
mean an A.A. won’t take advice or suggestions from more 
experienced members, but he surely won’t take orders. Who 
is more unpopular than the oldtime A.A., full of wisdom, 
who moves to another area and tries to tell the group there 
how to run its business? He and all like him who “view 
with alarm for the good of A.A.” meet the most stubborn 
resistance or, worse still, laughter.
You might think A.A.’s headquarters in New York 
would be an exception. Surely, the people there would have 
to have some authority. But long ago, trustees and staff 
members alike found they could do no more than make 
suggestions, and very mild ones at that. They even had to 
coin a couple of sentences which still go into half the let­
ters they write: “Of course, you are at perfect liberty to 
handle this matter any way you please. But the majority 
* In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was changed to the General 
Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous, Inc., and the Foundation office is now 
the General Service Office.

T R A D I T I O N N I N E
176
experience in A.A. does seem to suggest…” Now, that at­
titude is far removed from central government, isn’t it? We 
recognize that alcoholics can’t be dictated to—individually 
or collectively.
At this juncture, we can hear a churchman exclaim, 
“They are making disobedience a virtue!” He is joined by a 
psychiatrist who says, “Defiant brats! They won’t grow up 
and conform to social usage!” The man in the street says, 
“I don’t understand it. They must be nuts!” But all these 
observers have overlooked something unique in Alcoholics 
Anonymous. Unless each A.A. member follows to the best 
of his ability our suggested Twelve Steps to recovery, he 
almost certainly signs his own death warrant. His drunk­
enness and dissolution are not penalties inflicted by people 
in authority; they result from his personal disobedience to 
spiritual principles.
The same stern threat applies to the group itself. Un­
less there is approximate conformity to A.A.’s Twelve Tra­
ditions, the group, too, can deteriorate and die. So we of 
A.A. do obey spiritual principles, first because we must, 
and ultimately because we love the kind of life such obedi­
ence brings. Great suffering and great love are A.A.’s disci­
plinarians; we need no others.
It is clear now that we ought never to name boards to 
govern us, but it is equally clear that we shall always need 
to authorize workers to serve us. It is the difference be­
tween the spirit of vested authority and the spirit of ser­
vice, two concepts which are sometimes poles apart. It is in 
this spirit of service that we elect the A.A. group’s informal 
rotating committee, the intergroup association for the area, 

T R A D I T I O N N I N E
177
and the General Service Conferences of Alcoholics Anon­
ymous for A.A. as a whole. Even our Foundation, once 
an independent board, is today directly accountable to our 
Fellowship. Its trustees are the caretakers and expediters 
of our world services.
Just as the aim of each A.A. member is personal sobri­
ety, the aim of our services is to bring sobriety within reach 
of all who want it. If nobody does the group’s chores, if 
the area’s telephone rings unanswered, if we do not reply 
to our mail, then A.A. as we know it would stop. Our com­
munications lines with those who need our help would be 
broken.
A.A. has to function, but at the same time it must avoid 
those dangers of great wealth, prestige, and entrenched 
power which necessarily tempt other societies. Though 
Tradition Nine at first sight seems to deal with a purely 
practical matter, in its actual operation it discloses a so­
ciety without organization, animated only by the spirit of 
service—a true fellowship.
TRADITION NINE — long form
Each A.A. group needs the least possible organization. 
Rotating leadership is the best. The small group may elect 
its secretary, the large group its rotating committee, and 
the groups of a large metropolitan area their central or in­
tergroup committee, which often employs a full-time sec­
retary. The trustees of the General Service Board are, in 
effect, our A.A. General Service Committee. They are the 

T R A D I T I O N N I N E
178
custodians of our A.A. Tradition and the receivers of vol­
untary A.A. contributions by which we maintain our A.A. 
General Service Office at New York. They are authorized 
by the groups to handle our overall public relations and 
they guarantee the integrity of our principal newspaper, 
the AA Grapevine. All such representatives are to be guid­
ed in the spirit of service, for true leaders in A.A. are but 
trusted and experienced servants of the whole. They derive 
no real authority from their titles; they do not govern. Uni­
versal respect is the key to their usefulness.