192
The Twelve Traditions
(The Long Form)
Our A.A. experience has taught us that:
One—Each member of Alcoholics Anonymous is but a 
small part of a great whole. A.A. must continue to live 
or most of us will surely die. Hence our common welfare 
comes first. But individual welfare follows close afterward.
Two—For our group purpose there is but one ultimate au­
thority—a loving God as He may express Himself in our 
group conscience.
Three—Our membership ought to include all who suffer 
from alcoholism. Hence we may refuse none who wish to 
recover. Nor ought A.A. membership ever depend upon 
money or conformity. Any two or three alcoholics gathered 
together for sobriety may call themselves an A.A. group, 
provided that, as a group, they have no other affiliation.
Four—With respect to its own affairs, each A.A. group 
should be responsible to no other authority than its own 
conscience. But when its plans concern the welfare of 
neighboring groups also, those groups ought to be con­
sulted. And no group, regional committee, or individual 
should ever take any action that might greatly affect A.A. 
as a whole without conferring with the trustees of the 
General Service Board. On such issues our common wel­
fare is paramount. 

193
T R A D I T I O N S — L O N G F O R M
Five—Each Alcoholics Anonymous group ought to be a 
spiritual entity having but one primary purpose—that of 
carrying its message to the alcoholic who still suffers.
Six—Problems of money, property, and authority may 
easily divert us from our primary spiritual aim. We think, 
therefore, that any considerable property of genuine use to 
A.A. should be separately incorporated and managed, thus 
dividing the material from the spiritual. An A.A. group, 
as such, should never go into business. Secondary aids to 
A.A., such as clubs or hospitals which require much prop­
erty or administration, ought to be incorporated and so 
set apart that, if necessary, they can be freely discarded 
by the groups. Hence such facilities ought not to use the 
A.A. name. Their management should be the sole respon­
sibility of those people who financially support them. For 
clubs, A.A. managers are usually preferred. But hospitals, 
as well as other places of recuperation, ought to be well 
outside A.A.—and medically supervised. While an A.A. 
group may cooperate with anyone, such cooperation ought 
never to go so far as affiliation or endorsement, actual or 
implied. An A.A. group can bind itself to no one.
Seven—The A.A. groups themselves ought to be fully sup­
ported by the voluntary contributions of their own mem­
bers. We think that each group should soon achieve this 
ideal; that any public solicitation of funds using the name 
of Alcoholics Anonymous is highly dangerous, whether by 
groups, clubs, hospitals, or other outside agencies; that ac­
ceptance of large gifts from any source, or of contributions 
carrying any obligation whatever, is unwise. Then, too, we 

T R A D I T I O N S — L O N G F O R M
194
view with much concern those A.A. treasuries which con­
tinue, beyond prudent reserves, to accumulate funds for no 
stated A.A. purpose. Experience has often warned us that 
nothing can so surely destroy our spiritual heritage as fu­
tile disputes over property, money, and authority.
Eight—Alcoholics Anonymous should remain forever non­
professional. We define professionalism as the occupation 
of counseling alcoholics for fees or hire. But we may em­
ploy alcoholics where they are going to perform those ser­
vices for which we might otherwise have to engage nonalco­
holics. Such special services may be well recompensed. But 
our usual A.A. Twelfth Step work is never to be paid for.
Nine—Each A.A. group needs the least possible organiza­
tion. Rotating leadership is the best. The small group may 
elect its secretary, the large group its rotating committee, 
and the groups of a large metropolitan area their central 
or intergroup committee, which often employs a full-time 
secretary. The trustees of the General Service Board are, 
in effect, our A.A. General Service Committee. They are 
the custodians of our A.A. Tradition and the receivers of 
voluntary A.A. contributions by which we maintain our 
A.A. General Service Office at New York. They are autho­
rized by the groups to handle our overall public relations 
and they guarantee the integrity of our principal news­
paper, the AA Grapevine. All such representatives are to 
be guided in the spirit of service, for true leaders in A.A. 
are but trusted and experienced servants of the whole. 
They derive no real authority from their titles; they do not 
govern. Universal respect is the key to their usefulness.

195
T R A D I T I O N S — L O N G F O R M
Ten—No A.A. group or member should ever, in such a 
way as to implicate A.A., express any opinion on outside 
controversial issues—particularly those of politics, alcohol 
reform, or sectarian religion. The Alcoholics Anonymous 
groups oppose no one. Concerning such matters they can 
express no views whatever.
Eleven—Our relations with the general public should be 
characterized by personal anonymity. We think A.A. 
ought to avoid sensational advertising. Our names and pic­
tures as A.A. members ought not be broadcast, filmed, or 
publicly printed. Our public relations should be guided by 
the principle of attraction rather than promotion. There is 
never need to praise ourselves. We feel it better to let our 
friends recommend us.
Twelve—And finally, we of Alcoholics Anonymous believe 
that the principle of anonymity has an immense spiritual 
significance. It reminds us that we are to place principles 
before personalities; that we are actually to practice a gen­
uine humility. This to the end that our great blessings may 
never spoil us; that we shall forever live in thankful con­
templation of Him who presides over us all.