146
Tradition Four
“Each group should be autonomous except 
in matters affecting other groups or A.A. as 
a whole.”
AUTONOMY is a ten-dollar word. But in relation to us, 
it means very simply that every A.A. group can manage its 
affairs exactly as it pleases, except when A.A. as a whole is 
threatened. Comes now the same question raised in Tradi­
tion One. Isn’t such liberty foolishly dangerous?
Over the years, every conceivable deviation from our 
Twelve Steps and Traditions has been tried. That was sure 
to be, since we are so largely a band of ego-driven individu­
alists. Children of chaos, we have defiantly played with ev­
ery brand of fire, only to emerge unharmed and, we think, 
wiser. These very deviations created a vast process of trial 
and error which, under the grace of God, has brought us 
to where we stand today.
When A.A.’s Traditions were first published, in 1946, we 
had become sure that an A.A. group could stand almost 
any amount of battering. We saw that the group, exactly 
like the individual, must eventually conform to whatever 
tested principles would guarantee survival. We had discov­
ered that there was perfect safety in the process of trial and 
error. So confident of this had we become that the original 
statement of A.A. tradition carried this significant sen­
tence: “Any two or three alcoholics gathered together for 

T R A D I T I O N F O U R
147
sobriety may call themselves an A.A. group provided that 
as a group they have no other affiliation.”
This meant, of course, that we had been given the cour­
age to declare each A.A. group an individual entity, strictly 
reliant on its own conscience as a guide to action. In chart­
ing this enormous expanse of freedom, we found it neces­
sary to post only two storm signals: A group ought not do 
anything which would greatly injure A.A. as a whole, nor 
ought it affiliate itself with anything or anybody else. There 
would be real danger should we commence to call some 
groups “wet,” others “dry,” still others “Republican” or 
“Communist,” and yet others “Catholic” or “Protestant.” 
The A.A. group would have to stick to its course or be 
hopelessly lost. Sobriety had to be its sole objective. In all 
other respects there was perfect freedom of will and ac­
tion. Every group had the right to be wrong.
When A.A. was still young, lots of eager groups were 
forming. In a town we’ll call Middleton, a real crackerjack 
had started up. The townspeople were as hot as firecrack­
ers about it. Stargazing, the elders dreamed of innovations. 
They figured the town needed a great big alcoholic cen­
ter, a kind of pilot plant A.A. groups could duplicate ev­
erywhere. Beginning on the ground floor there would be a 
club; in the second story they would sober up drunks and 
hand them currency for their back debts; the third deck 
would house an educational project—quite noncontroversial, of course. In imagination the gleaming center was to 
go up several stories more, but three would do for a start. 
This would all take a lot of money—other people’s money. 
Believe it or not, wealthy townsfolk bought the idea.

T R A D I T I O N F O U R
148
There were, though, a few conservative dissenters among 
the alcoholics. They wrote the Foundation*, A.A.’s head­
quarters in New York, wanting to know about this sort of 
streamlining. They understood that the elders, just to nail 
things down good, were about to apply to the Foundation 
for a charter. These few were disturbed and skeptical.
Of course, there was a promoter in the deal—a superpromoter. By his eloquence he allayed all fears, despite 
advice from the Foundation that it could issue no char­
ter, and that ventures which mixed an A.A. group with 
medication and education had come to sticky ends else­
where. To make things safer, the promoter organized three 
corporations and became president of them all. Freshly 
painted, the new center shone. The warmth of it all spread 
through the town. Soon things began to hum. To insure 
foolproof, continuous operation, sixty-one rules and regu­
lations were adopted.
But alas, this bright scene was not long in darken­
ing. Confusion replaced serenity. It was found that some 
drunks yearned for education, but doubted if they were al­
coholics. The personality defects of others could be cured 
maybe with a loan. Some were club-minded, but it was just 
a question of taking care of the lonely heart. Sometimes 
the swarming applicants would go for all three floors. Some 
would start at the top and come through to the bottom, 
becoming club members; others started in the club, pitched 
a binge, were hospitalized, then graduated to education on 
* In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was changed to the General 
Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous, Inc., and the Foundation office is now 
the General Service Office.

T R A D I T I O N F O U R
149
the third floor. It was a beehive of activity, all right, but 
unlike a beehive, it was confusion compounded. An A.A. 
group, as such, simply couldn’t handle this sort of project. 
All too late that was discovered. Then came the inevita­
ble explosion—something like that day the boiler burst in 
Wombley’s Clapboard Factory. A chill chokedamp of fear 
and frustration fell over the group.
When that lifted, a wonderful thing had happened. The 
head promoter wrote the Foundation office. He said he 
wished he’d paid some attention to A.A. experience. Then 
he did something else that was to become an A.A. clas­
sic. It all went on a little card about golf-score size. The 
cover read: “Middleton Group #1, Rule #62.” Once the 
card was unfolded, a single pungent sentence leaped to the 
eye: “Don’t take yourself too damn seriously.”
Thus it was that under Tradition Four an A.A. group 
had exercised its right to be wrong. Moreover, it had per­
formed a great service for Alcoholics Anonymous, because 
it had been humbly willing to apply the lessons it learned. 
It had picked itself up with a laugh and gone on to better 
things. Even the chief architect, standing in the ruins of his 
dream, could laugh at himself—and that is the very acme 
of humility.
TRADITION FOUR — long form
With respect to its own affairs, each A.A. group should be 
responsible to no other authority than its own conscience. 
But when its plans concern the welfare of neighboring 

T R A D I T I O N F O U R
150
groups also, those groups ought to be consulted. And no 
group, regional committee, or individual should ever take 
any action that might greatly affect A.A. as a whole with­
out conferring with the trustees of the General Service 
Board. On such issues our common welfare is paramount.