161
Tradition Seven
“Every A.A. group ought to be fully selfsupporting, declining outside contributions.”
SELF-SUPPORTING alcoholics? Who ever heard of 
such a thing? Yet we find that’s what we have to be. This 
principle is telling evidence of the profound change that 
A.A. has wrought in all of us. Everybody knows that active 
alcoholics scream that they have no troubles money can’t 
cure. Always, we’ve had our hands out. Time out of mind 
we’ve been dependent upon somebody, usually moneywise. When a society composed entirely of alcoholics says 
it’s going to pay its bills, that’s really news.
Probably no A.A. Tradition had the labor pains this one 
did. In early times, we were all broke. When you add to this 
the habitual supposition that people ought to give money 
to alcoholics trying to stay sober, it can be understood why 
we thought we deserved a pile of folding money. What 
great things A.A. would be able to do with it! But oddly 
enough, people who had money thought otherwise. They 
figured that it was high time we now—sober—paid our 
own way. So our Fellowship stayed poor because it had to.
There was another reason for our collective poverty. It 
was soon apparent that while alcoholics would spend lav­
ishly on Twelfth Step cases, they had a terrific aversion to 
dropping money into a meeting-place hat for group purpos­
es. We were astounded to find that we were as tight as the 

T R A D I T I O N S E V E N
162
bark on a tree. So A.A., the movement, started and stayed 
broke, while its individual members waxed prosperous.
Alcoholics are certainly all-or-nothing people. Our reac­
tions to money prove this. As A.A. emerged from its infan­
cy into adolescence, we swung from the idea that we need­
ed vast sums of money to the notion that A.A. shouldn’t 
have any. On every lip were the words “You can’t mix A.A. 
and money. We shall have to separate the spiritual from 
the material.” We took this violent new tack because here 
and there members had tried to make money out of their 
A.A. connections, and we feared we’d be exploited. Now 
and then, grateful benefactors had endowed clubhouses, 
and as a result there was sometimes outside interference 
in our affairs. We had been presented with a hospital, and 
almost immediately the donor’s son became its principal 
patient and would-be manager. One A.A. group was given 
five thousand dollars to do with what it would. The hassle 
over that chunk of money played havoc for years. Fright­
ened by these complications, some groups refused to have 
a cent in their treasuries.
Despite these misgivings, we had to recognize the fact 
that A.A. had to function. Meeting places cost something. 
To save whole areas from turmoil, small offices had to be 
set up, telephones installed, and a few full-time secretar­
ies hired. Over many protests, these things were accom­
plished. We saw that if they weren’t, the man coming in the 
door couldn’t get a break. These simple services would re­
quire small sums of money which we could and would pay 
ourselves. At last the pendulum stopped swinging and 
pointed straight at Tradition Seven as it reads today.

T R A D I T I O N S E V E N
163
In this connection, Bill likes to tell the following pointed 
story. He explains that when Jack Alexander’s Saturday 
Evening Post piece broke in 1941, thousands of frantic let­
ters from distraught alcoholics and their families hit the 
Foundation* letterbox in New York. “Our office staff,” Bill 
says, “consisted of two people: one devoted secretary and 
myself. How could this landslide of appeals be met? We’d 
have to have some more full-time help, that was sure. So we 
asked the A.A. groups for voluntary contributions. Would 
they send us a dollar a member a year? Otherwise this 
heartbreaking mail would have to go unanswered.
“To my surprise, the response of the groups was slow. I 
got mighty sore about it. Looking at this avalanche of mail 
one morning at the office, I paced up and down ranting 
how irresponsible and tightwad my fellow members were. 
Just then an old acquaintance stuck a tousled and aching 
head in the door. He was our prize slippee. I could see he 
had an awful hangover. Remembering some of my own, 
my heart filled with pity. I motioned him to my inside cu­
bicle and produced a five-dollar bill. As my total income 
was thirty dollars a week at the time, this was a fairly large 
donation. Lois really needed the money for groceries, but 
that didn’t stop me. The intense relief on my friend’s face 
warmed my heart. I felt especially virtuous as I thought of 
all the ex-drunks who wouldn’t even send the Foundation 
a dollar apiece, and here I was gladly making a five-dollar 
investment to fix a hangover.
* In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was changed to the General 
Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous, Inc., and the Foundation office is now 
the General Service Office.

T R A D I T I O N S E V E N
164
“The meeting that night was at New York’s old 24th 
Street Clubhouse. During the intermission, the treasurer 
gave a timid talk on how broke the club was. (That was in 
the period when you couldn’t mix money and A.A.) But fi­
nally he said it—the landlord would put us out if we didn’t 
pay up. He concluded his remarks by saying, ‘Now boys, 
please go heavier on the hat tonight, will you?’
“I heard all this quite plainly, as I was piously trying to 
convert a newcomer who sat next to me. The hat came in 
my direction, and I reached into my pocket. Still working 
on my prospect, I fumbled and came up with a fifty-cent 
piece. Somehow it looked like a very big coin. Hastily, I 
dropped it back and fished out a dime, which clinked thinly 
as I dropped it in the hat. Hats never got folding money in 
those days.
“Then I woke up. I who had boasted my generosity that 
morning was treating my own club worse than the distant 
alcoholics who had forgotten to send the Foundation their 
dollars. I realized that my five-dollar gift to the slippee was 
an ego-feeding proposition, bad for him and bad for me. 
There was a place in A.A. where spirituality and money 
would mix, and that was in the hat!”
There is another story about money. One night in 1948, 
the trustees of the Foundation were having their quarterly 
meeting. The agenda discussion included a very important 
question. A certain lady had died. When her will was read, 
it was discovered she had left Alcoholics Anonymous in 
trust with the Alcoholic Foundation a sum of ten thousand
dollars. The question was: Should A.A. take the gift?
What a debate we had on that one! The Foundation 

T R A D I T I O N S E V E N
165
was really hard up just then; the groups weren’t sending in 
enough for the support of the office; we had been tossing 
in all the book income and even that hadn’t been enough. 
The reserve was melting like snow in springtime. We needed 
that ten thousand dollars. “Maybe,” some said, “the groups 
will never fully support the office. We can’t let it shut down; 
it’s far too vital. Yes, let’s take the money. Let’s take all such 
donations in the future. We’re going to need them.”
Then came the opposition. They pointed out that the 
Foundation board already knew of a total of half a mil­
lion dollars set aside for A.A. in the wills of people still 
alive. Heaven only knew how much there was we hadn’t 
heard about. If outside donations weren’t declined, abso­
lutely cut off, then the Foundation would one day become 
rich. Moreover, at the slightest intimation to the general 
public from our trustees that we needed money, we could 
become immensely rich. Compared to this prospect, the 
ten thousand dollars under consideration wasn’t much, 
but like the alcoholic’s first drink it would, if taken, inevi­
tably set up a disastrous chain reaction. Where would that 
land us? Whoever pays the piper is apt to call the tune, 
and if the A.A. Foundation obtained money from outside 
sources, its trustees might be tempted to run things with­
out reference to the wishes of A.A. as a whole. Relieved of 
responsibility, every alcoholic would shrug and say, “Oh, 
the Foundation is wealthy—why should I bother?” The 
pressure of that fat treasury would surely tempt the board 
to invent all kinds of schemes to do good with such funds, 
and so divert A.A. from its primary purpose. The mo­
ment that happened, our Fellowship’s confidence would 

T R A D I T I O N S E V E N
166
be shaken. The board would be isolated, and would fall 
under heavy attack of criticism from both A.A. and the 
public. These were the possibilities, pro and con.
Then our trustees wrote a bright page of A.A. history. 
They declared for the principle that A.A. must always stay 
poor. Bare running expenses plus a prudent reserve would 
henceforth be the Foundation’s financial policy. Difficult 
as it was, they officially declined that ten thousand dollars, 
and adopted a formal, airtight resolution that all such fu­
ture gifts would be similarly declined. At that moment, we 
believe, the principle of corporate poverty was firmly and 
finally embedded in A.A. tradition.
When these facts were printed, there was a profound 
reaction. To people familiar with endless drives for chari­
table funds, A.A. presented a strange and refreshing spec­
tacle. Approving editorials here and abroad generated a 
wave of confidence in the integrity of Alcoholics Anony­
mous. They pointed out that the irresponsible had become 
responsible, and that by making financial independence 
part of its tradition, Alcoholics Anonymous had revived 
an ideal that its era had almost forgotten.
TRADITION SEVEN — long form
The A.A. groups themselves ought to be fully supported 
by the voluntary contributions of their own members. We 
think that each group should soon achieve this ideal; that 
any public solicitation of funds using the name of Alco­
holics Anonymous is highly dangerous, whether by groups, 

T R A D I T I O N S E V E N
167
clubs, hospitals, or other outside agencies; that acceptance 
of large gifts from any source, or of contributions carry­
ing any obligation whatever, is unwise. Then, too, we view 
with much concern those A.A. treasuries which continue, 
beyond prudent reserves, to accumulate funds for no stated 
A.A. purpose. Experience has often warned us that noth­
ing can so surely destroy our spiritual heritage as futile dis­
putes over property, money, and authority.