151
Tradition Five
“Each group has but one primary purpose—
to carry its message to the alcoholic who
still suffers.”
“SHOEMAKER, stick to thy last!” …better do one thing 
supremely well than many badly. That is the central theme 
of this Tradition. Around it our Society gathers in unity. 
The very life of our Fellowship requires the preservation 
of this principle.
Alcoholics Anonymous can be likened to a group of phy­
sicians who might find a cure for cancer, and upon whose 
concerted work would depend the answer for sufferers of 
this disease. True, each physician in such a group might 
have his own specialty. Every doctor concerned would at 
times wish he could devote himself to his chosen field rath­
er than work only with the group. But once these men had 
hit upon a cure, once it became apparent that only by their 
united effort could this be accomplished, then all of them 
would feel bound to devote themselves solely to the relief 
of cancer. In the radiance of such a miraculous discovery, 
any doctor would set his other ambitions aside, at whatever 
personal cost.
Just as firmly bound by obligation are the members 
of Alcoholics Anonymous, who have demonstrated that 
they can help problem drinkers as others seldom can. The 
unique ability of each A.A. to identify himself with, and 

T R A D I T I O N F I V E
152
bring recovery to, the newcomer in no way depends upon 
his learning, eloquence, or on any special individual skills. 
The only thing that matters is that he is an alcoholic who 
has found a key to sobriety. These legacies of suffering and 
of recovery are easily passed among alcoholics, one to the 
other. This is our gift from God, and its bestowal upon 
others like us is the one aim that today animates A.A.’s all 
around the globe.
There is another reason for this singleness of purpose. It 
is the great paradox of A.A. that we know we can seldom 
keep the precious gift of sobriety unless we give it away. 
If a group of doctors possessed a cancer cure, they might 
be conscience-stricken if they failed their mission through 
self-seeking. Yet such a failure wouldn’t jeopardize their 
personal survival. For us, if we neglect those who are still 
sick, there is unremitting danger to our own lives and san­
ity. Under these compulsions of self-preservation, duty, 
and love, it is not strange that our Society has concluded 
that it has but one high mission—to carry the A.A. mes­
sage to those who don’t know there’s a way out.
Highlighting the wisdom of A.A.’s single purpose, a 
member tells this story:
“Restless one day, I felt I’d better do some Twelfth Step 
work. Maybe I should take out some insurance against a 
slip. But first I’d have to find a drunk to work on.
“So I hopped the subway to Towns Hospital, where I 
asked Dr. Silkworth if he had a prospect. ‘Nothing too 
promising,’ the little doc said. ‘There’s just one chap on 
the third floor who might be a possibility. But he’s an aw­
fully tough Irishman. I never saw a man so obstinate. He 

T R A D I T I O N F I V E
153
shouts that if his partner would treat him better, and his 
wife would leave him alone, he’d soon solve his alcohol 
problem. He’s had a bad case of D.T.’s, he’s pretty foggy, 
and he’s very suspicious of everybody. Doesn’t sound too 
good, does it? But working with him may do something for 
you, so why don’t you have a go at it?’
“I was soon sitting beside a big hulk of a man. Decid­
edly unfriendly, he stared at me out of eyes which were 
slits in his red and swollen face. I had to agree with the 
doctor—he certainly didn’t look good. But I told him my 
own story. I explained what a wonderful Fellowship we 
had, how well we understood each other. I bore down 
hard on the hopelessness of the drunk’s dilemma. I in­
sisted that few drunks could ever get well on their own 
steam, but that in our groups we could do together what 
we could not do separately. He interrupted to scoff at this 
and asserted he’d fix his wife, his partner, and his alcohol­
ism by himself. Sarcastically he asked, ‘How much does 
your scheme cost?’
“I was thankful I could tell him, ‘Nothing at all.’
“His next question: ‘What are you getting out of it?’
“Of course, my answer was ‘My own sobriety and a 
mighty happy life.’
“Still dubious, he demanded, ‘Do you really mean the 
only reason you are here is to try and help me and to help 
yourself?’
“’Yes,’ I said. ‘That’s absolutely all there is to it. There’s 
no angle.’
“Then, hesitantly, I ventured to talk about the spiritual 
side of our program. What a freeze that drunk gave me! I’d 

T R A D I T I O N F I V E
154
no sooner got the word ‘spiritual’ out of my mouth than 
he pounced. ‘Oh!’ he said. ‘Now I get it! You’re proselyt­
ing for some damn religious sect or other. Where do you 
get that “no angle” stuff? I belong to a great church that 
means everything to me. You’ve got a nerve to come in here 
talking religion!’
“Thank heaven I came up with the right answer for 
that one. It was based foursquare on the single purpose 
of A.A. ‘You have faith,’ I said. ‘Perhaps far deeper 
faith than mine. No doubt you’re better taught in reli­
gious matters than I. So I can’t tell you anything about 
religion. I don’t even want to try. I’ll bet, too, that you 
could give me a letter-perfect definition of humility. But 
from what you’ve told me about yourself and your prob­
lems and how you propose to lick them, I think I know 
what’s wrong.’
“‘Okay,’ he said. ‘Give me the business.’
“‘Well,’ said I, ‘I think you’re just a conceited Irishman 
who thinks he can run the whole show.’
“This really rocked him. But as he calmed down, he be­
gan to listen while I tried to show him that humility was the 
main key to sobriety. Finally, he saw that I wasn’t attempt­
ing to change his religious views, that I wanted him to find 
the grace in his own religion that would aid his recovery. 
From there on we got along fine.
“Now,” concludes the oldtimer, “suppose I’d been 
obliged to talk to this man on religious grounds? Suppose 
my answer had to be that A.A. needed a lot of money; that 
A.A. went in for education, hospitals, and rehabilitation? 
Suppose I’d suggested that I’d take a hand in his domestic 

T R A D I T I O N F I V E
155
and business affairs? Where would we have wound up? No 
place, of course.”
Years later, this tough Irish customer liked to say, “My 
sponsor sold me one idea, and that was sobriety. At the 
time, I couldn’t have bought anything else.”
TRADITION FIVE — long form
Each Alcoholics Anonymous group ought to be a spiritual 
entity having but one primary purpose—that of carrying its 
message to the alcoholic who still suffers.