132
Tradition Two
“For our group purpose there is but one ultimate 
authority—a loving God as He may express 
Himself in our group conscience. Our leaders 
are but trusted servants; they do not govern.”
WHERE does A.A. get its direction? Who runs it? This, 
too, is a puzzler for every friend and newcomer. When told 
that our Society has no president having authority to gov­
ern it, no treasurer who can compel the payment of any 
dues, no board of directors who can cast an erring mem­
ber into outer darkness, when indeed no A.A. can give an­
other a directive and enforce obedience, our friends gasp 
and exclaim, “This simply can’t be. There must be an angle 
somewhere.” These practical folk then read Tradition Two, 
and learn that the sole authority in A.A. is a loving God 
as He may express Himself in the group conscience. They 
dubiously ask an experienced A.A. member if this really 
works. The member, sane to all appearances, immediately 
answers, “Yes! It definitely does.” The friends mutter that 
this looks vague, nebulous, pretty naive to them. Then they 
commence to watch us with speculative eyes, pick up a 
fragment of A.A. history, and soon have the solid facts.
What are these facts of A.A. life which brought us to 
this apparently impractical principle?
John Doe, a good A.A., moves—let us say—to Middletown, U.S.A. Alone now, he reflects that he may not be able 

T R A D I T I O N T W O
133
to stay sober, or even alive, unless he passes on to other 
alcoholics what was so freely given him. He feels a spiri­
tual and ethical compulsion, because hundreds may be suf­
fering within reach of his help. Then, too, he misses his 
home group. He needs other alcoholics as much as they 
need him. He visits preachers, doctors, editors, policemen, 
and bartenders …with the result that Middletown now has 
a group, and he is the founder.
Being the founder, he is at first the boss. Who else could 
be? Very soon, though, his assumed authority to run every­
thing begins to be shared with the first alcoholics he has 
helped. At this moment, the benign dictator becomes the 
chairman of a committee composed of his friends. These are 
the growing group’s hierarchy of service—self-appointed,
of course, because there is no other way. In a matter of 
months, A.A. booms in Middletown.
The founder and his friends channel spirituality to new­
comers, hire halls, make hospital arrangements, and entreat 
their wives to brew gallons of coffee. Being on the human 
side, the founder and his friends may bask a little in glory. 
They say to one another, “Perhaps it would be a good idea if 
we continue to keep a firm hand on A.A. in this town. After 
all, we are experienced. Besides, look at all the good we’ve 
done these drunks. They should be grateful!” True, found­
ers and their friends are sometimes wiser and more humble 
than this. But more often at this stage they are not.
Growing pains now beset the group. Panhandlers pan­
handle. Lonely hearts pine. Problems descend like an 
avalanche. Still more important, murmurs are heard in 
the body politic, which swell into a loud cry: “Do these 

T R A D I T I O N T W O
134
oldtimers think they can run this group forever? Let’s have 
an election!” The founder and his friends are hurt and 
depressed. They rush from crisis to crisis and from member 
to member, pleading; but it’s no use, the revolution is on. 
The group conscience is about to take over.
Now comes the election. If the founder and his friends 
have served well, they may—to their surprise—be reinstat­
ed for a time. If, however, they have heavily resisted the ris­
ing tide of democracy, they may be summarily beached. In 
either case, the group now has a so-called rotating commit­
tee, very sharply limited in its authority. In no sense what­
ever can its members govern or direct the group. They are 
servants. Theirs is the sometimes thankless privilege of do­
ing the group’s chores. Headed by the chairman, they look 
after public relations and arrange meetings. Their treasur­
er, strictly accountable, takes money from the hat that is 
passed, banks it, pays the rent and other bills, and makes a 
regular report at business meetings. The secretary sees that 
literature is on the table, looks after the phone-answering 
service, answers the mail, and sends out notices of meet­
ings. Such are the simple services that enable the group to 
function. The committee gives no spiritual advice, judges 
no one’s conduct, issues no orders. Every one of them may 
be promptly eliminated at the next election if they try this. 
And so they make the belated discovery that they are re­
ally servants, not senators. These are universal experiences. 
Thus throughout A.A. does the group conscience decree 
the terms upon which its leaders shall serve.
This brings us straight to the question “Does A.A. have 
a real leadership?” Most emphatically the answer is “Yes, 

T R A D I T I O N T W O
135
notwithstanding the apparent lack of it.” Let’s turn again 
to the deposed founder and his friends. What becomes of 
them? As their grief and anxiety wear away, a subtle change 
begins. Ultimately, they divide into two classes known in 
A.A. slang as “elder statesmen” and “bleeding deacons.” 
The elder statesman is the one who sees the wisdom of the 
group’s decision, who holds no resentment over his reduced 
status, whose judgment, fortified by considerable experi­
ence, is sound, and who is willing to sit quietly on the side­
lines patiently awaiting developments. The bleeding deacon 
is one who is just as surely convinced that the group cannot 
get along without him, who constantly connives for reelec­
tion to office, and who continues to be consumed with selfpity. A few hemorrhage so badly that—drained of all A.A. 
spirit and principle—they get drunk. At times the A.A. 
landscape seems to be littered with bleeding forms. Nearly 
every oldtimer in our Society has gone through this process 
in some degree. Happily, most of them survive and live to 
become elder statesmen. They become the real and per­
manent leadership of A.A. Theirs is the quiet opinion, the 
sure knowledge and humble example that resolve a crisis. 
When sorely perplexed, the group inevitably turns to them 
for advice. They become the voice of the group conscience; 
in fact, these are the true voice of Alcoholics Anonymous. 
They do not drive by mandate; they lead by example. This 
is the experience which has led us to the conclusion that 
our group conscience, well-advised by its elders, will be in 
the long run wiser than any single leader.
When A.A. was only three years old, an event occurred 
demonstrating this principle. One of the first members of 

T R A D I T I O N T W O
136
A.A., entirely contrary to his own desires, was obliged to 
conform to group opinion. Here is the story in his words.
“One day I was doing a Twelfth Step job at a hospital 
in New York. The proprietor, Charlie, summoned me to his 
office. ‘Bill,’ he said, ‘I think it’s a shame that you are fi­
nancially so hard up. All around you these drunks are get­
ting well and making money. But you’re giving this work 
full time, and you’re broke. It isn’t fair.’ Charlie fished in his 
desk and came up with an old financial statement. Hand­
ing it to me, he continued, ‘This shows the kind of money 
the hospital used to make back in the 1920’s. Thousands of 
dollars a month. It should be doing just as well now, and 
it would—if only you’d help me. So why don’t you move 
your work in here? I’ll give you an office, a decent drawing 
account, and a very healthy slice of the profits. Three years 
ago, when my head doctor, Silkworth, began to tell me of 
the idea of helping drunks by spirituality, I thought it was 
crackpot stuff, but I’ve changed my mind. Some day this 
bunch of ex-drunks of yours will fill Madison Square Gar­
den, and I don’t see why you should starve meanwhile. What 
I propose is perfectly ethical. You can become a lay thera­
pist, and more successful than anybody in the business.’
“I was bowled over. There were a few twinges of con­
science until I saw how really ethical Charlie’s proposal 
was. There was nothing wrong whatever with becoming a 
lay therapist. I thought of Lois coming home exhausted 
from the department store each day, only to cook sup­
per for a houseful of drunks who weren’t paying board. 
I thought of the large sum of money still owing my Wall 
Street creditors. I thought of a few of my alcoholic friends, 

T R A D I T I O N T W O
137
who were making as much money as ever. Why shouldn’t I 
do as well as they?
“Although I asked Charlie for a little time to consider it, 
my own mind was about made up. Racing back to Brook­
lyn on the subway, I had a seeming flash of divine guid­
ance. It was only a single sentence, but most convincing. 
In fact, it came right out of the Bible—a voice kept saying 
to me, ‘The laborer is worthy of his hire.’ Arriving home, 
I found Lois cooking as usual, while three drunks looked 
hungrily on from the kitchen door. I drew her aside and 
told the glorious news. She looked interested, but not as 
excited as I thought she should be.
“It was meeting night. Although none of the alcoholics 
we boarded seemed to get sober, some others had. With 
their wives they crowded into our downstairs parlor. At 
once I burst into the story of my opportunity. Never shall 
I forget their impassive faces, and the steady gaze they fo­
cused upon me. With waning enthusiasm, my tale trailed 
off to the end. There was a long silence.
“Almost timidly, one of my friends began to speak. 
‘We know how hard up you are, Bill. It bothers us a lot. 
We’ve often wondered what we might do about it. But I 
think I speak for everyone here when I say that what you 
now propose bothers us an awful lot more.’ The speaker’s 
voice grew more confident. ‘Don’t you realize,’ he went 
on, ‘that you can never become a professional? As gener­
ous as Charlie has been to us, don’t you see that we can’t 
tie this thing up with his hospital or any other? You tell 
us that Charlie’s proposal is ethical. Sure, it’s ethical, but 
what we’ve got won’t run on ethics only; it has to be better.

T R A D I T I O N T W O
138
Sure, Charlie’s idea is good, but it isn’t good enough. This 
is a matter of life and death, Bill, and nothing but the very 
best will do!’ Challengingly, my friends looked at me as 
their spokesman continued. ‘Bill, haven’t you often said 
right here in this meeting that sometimes the good is the 
enemy of the best? Well, this is a plain case of it. You can’t 
do this thing to us!’
“So spoke the group conscience. The group was right 
and I was wrong; the voice on the subway was not the voice 
of God. Here was the true voice, welling up out of my 
friends. I listened, and—thank God—I obeyed.”
TRADITION TWO — long form
For our group purpose there is but one ultimate authority 
— a loving God as He may express Himself in our group 
conscience.