156
Tradition Six
“An A.A. group ought never endorse, finance, 
or lend the A.A. name to any related facility 
or outside enterprise, lest problems of money, 
property, and prestige divert us from our pri­
mary purpose.”
THE moment we saw that we had an answer for alcohol­
ism, it was reasonable (or so it seemed at the time) for us to 
feel that we might have the answer to a lot of other things. 
The A.A. groups, many thought, could go into business, 
might finance any enterprise whatever in the total field of 
alcoholism. In fact, we felt duty-bound to throw the whole 
weight of the A.A. name behind any meritorious cause.
Here are some of the things we dreamed. Hospitals 
didn’t like alcoholics, so we thought we’d build a hospital 
chain of our own. People needed to be told what alcohol­
ism was, so we’d educate the public, even rewrite school 
and medical textbooks. We’d gather up derelicts from skid 
rows, sort out those who could get well, and make it possi­
ble for the rest to earn their livelihood in a kind of quaran­
tined confinement. Maybe these places would make large 
sums of money to carry on our other good works. We seri­
ously thought of rewriting the laws of the land, and having 
it declared that alcoholics are sick people. No more would 
they be jailed; judges would parole them in our custody. 
We’d spill A.A. into the dark regions of dope addiction 

T R A D I T I O N S I X
157
and criminality. We’d form groups of depressive and para­
noid folks; the deeper the neurosis, the better we’d like it. It 
stood to reason that if alcoholism could be licked, so could 
any problem.
It occurred to us that we could take what we had into 
the factories and cause laborers and capitalists to love each 
other. Our uncompromising honesty might soon clean up 
politics. With one arm around the shoulder of religion and 
the other around the shoulder of medicine, we’d resolve 
their differences. Having learned to live so happily, we’d 
show everybody else how. Why, we thought, our Society of 
Alcoholics Anonymous might prove to be the spearhead 
of a new spiritual advance! We might transform the world.
Yes, we of A.A. did dream those dreams. How natu­
ral that was, since most alcoholics are bankrupt idealists. 
Nearly every one of us had wished to do great good, per­
form great deeds, and embody great ideals. We are all per­
fectionists who, failing perfection, have gone to the other 
extreme and settled for the bottle and the blackout. Provi­
dence, through A.A., had brought us within reach of our 
highest expectations. So why shouldn’t we share our way of 
life with everyone?
Whereupon we tried A.A. hospitals—they all bogged 
down because you cannot put an A.A. group into business; 
too many busybody cooks spoil the broth. A.A. groups 
had their fling at education, and when they began to pub­
licly whoop up the merits of this or that brand, people be­
came confused. Did A.A. fix drunks or was it an educa­
tional project? Was A.A. spiritual or was it medical? Was 
it a reform movement? In consternation, we saw ourselves 

T R A D I T I O N S I X
158
getting married to all kinds of enterprises, some good and 
some not so good. Watching alcoholics committed willynilly to prisons or asylums, we began to cry, “There oughtta 
be a law!” A.A.’s commenced to thump tables in legislative 
committee rooms and agitated for legal reform. That made 
good newspaper copy, but little else. We saw we’d soon be 
mired in politics. Even inside A.A. we found it imperative to 
remove the A.A. name from clubs and Twelfth Step houses.
These adventures implanted a deep-rooted conviction 
that in no circumstances could we endorse any related en­
terprise, no matter how good. We of Alcoholics Anony­
mous could not be all things to all men, nor should we try.
Years ago this principle of “no endorsement” was put to 
a vital test. Some of the great distilling companies proposed 
to go into the field of alcohol education. It would be a good 
thing, they believed, for the liquor trade to show a sense of 
public responsibility. They wanted to say that liquor should 
be enjoyed, not misused; hard drinkers ought to slow down, 
and problem drinkers—alcoholics—should not drink at all.
In one of their trade associations, the question arose of 
just how this campaign should be handled. Of course, they 
would use the resources of radio, press, and films to make 
their point. But what kind of person should head the job? 
They immediately thought of Alcoholics Anonymous. If 
they could find a good public relations man in our ranks, 
why wouldn’t he be ideal? He’d certainly know the prob­
lem. His connection with A.A. would be valuable, because 
the Fellowship stood high in public favor and hadn’t an 
enemy in the world.
Soon they’d spotted their man, an A.A. with the necessary

T R A D I T I O N S I X
159
experience. Straightway he appeared at New York’s A.A. 
headquarters, asking, “Is there anything in our tradition 
that suggests I shouldn’t take a job like this one? This kind 
of education seems good to me, and is not too controver­
sial. Do you headquarters folks see any bugs in it?”
At first glance, it did look like a good thing. Then doubt 
crept in. The association wanted to use our member’s full 
name in all its advertising; he was to be described both as 
its director of publicity and as a member of Alcoholics 
Anonymous. Of course, there couldn’t be the slightest ob­
jection if such an association hired an A.A. member solely 
because of his public relations ability and his knowledge of 
alcoholism. But that wasn’t the whole story, for in this case 
not only was an A.A. member to break his anonymity at 
a public level, he was to link the name Alcoholics Anony­
mous to this particular educational project in the minds of 
millions. It would be bound to appear that A.A. was now 
backing education—liquor trade association style.
The minute we saw this compromising fact for what it 
was, we asked the prospective publicity director how he felt 
about it. “Great guns!” he said. “Of course I can’t take 
the job. The ink wouldn’t be dry on the first ad before an 
awful shriek would go up from the dry camp. They’d be out 
with lanterns looking for an honest A.A. to plump for their 
brand of education. A.A. would land exactly in the middle 
of the wet-dry controversy. Half the people in this country 
would think we’d signed up with the drys, the other half 
would think we’d joined the wets. What a mess!”
“Nevertheless,” we pointed out, “you still have a legal 
right to take this job.”

T R A D I T I O N S I X
160
“I know that,” he said. “But this is no time for legalities. 
Alcoholics Anonymous saved my life, and it comes first. I 
certainly won’t be the guy to land A.A. in big-time trouble, 
and this would really do it!”
Concerning endorsements, our friend had said it all. We 
saw as never before that we could not lend the A.A. name 
to any cause other than our own.
TRADITION SIX — long form
Problems of money, property, and authority may easily 
divert us from our primary spiritual aim. We think, there­
fore, that any considerable property of genuine use to A.A. 
should be separately incorporated and managed, thus di­
viding the material from the spiritual. An A.A. group, as 
such, should never go into business. Secondary aids to 
A.A., such as clubs or hospitals which require much prop­
erty or administration, ought to be incorporated and so 
set apart that, if necessary, they can be freely discarded 
by the groups. Hence such facilities ought not to use the 
A.A. name. Their management should be the sole respon­
sibility of those people who financially support them. For 
clubs, A.A. managers are usually preferred. But hospitals, 
as well as other places of recuperation, ought to be well 
outside A.A.—and medically supervised. While an A.A. 
group may cooperate with anyone, such cooperation ought 
never to go so far as affiliation or endorsement, actual or 
implied. An A.A. group can bind itself to no one.