139
Tradition Three
“The only requirement for A.A. membership is 
a desire to stop drinking.”
THIS Tradition is packed with meaning. For A.A. is real­
ly saying to every serious drinker, “You are an A.A. mem­
ber if you say so. You can declare yourself in; nobody can 
keep you out. No matter who you are, no matter how low 
you’ve gone, no matter how grave your emotional compli­
cations—even your crimes—we still can’t deny you A.A. 
We don’t want to keep you out. We aren’t a bit afraid you’ll 
harm us, never mind how twisted or violent you may be. 
We just want to be sure that you get the same great chance 
for sobriety that we’ve had. So you’re an A.A. member the 
minute you declare yourself.”
To establish this principle of membership took years of 
harrowing experience. In our early time, nothing seemed 
so fragile, so easily breakable as an A.A. group. Hardly 
an alcoholic we approached paid any attention; most of 
those who did join us were like flickering candles in a wind­
storm. Time after time, their uncertain flames blew out and 
couldn’t be relighted. Our unspoken, constant thought was 
“Which of us may be the next?”
A member gives us a vivid glimpse of those days. “At 
one time,” he says, “every A.A. group had many member­
ship rules. Everybody was scared witless that something or 
somebody would capsize the boat and dump us all back 

T R A D I T I O N T H R E E
140
into the drink. Our Foundation office* asked each group to 
send in its list of ‘protective’ regulations. The total list was 
a mile long. If all those rules had been in effect everywhere, 
nobody could have possibly joined A.A. at all, so great was 
the sum of our anxiety and fear.
“We were resolved to admit nobody to A.A. but that 
hypothetical class of people we termed ‘pure alcoholics.’ 
Except for their guzzling, and the unfortunate results there­
of, they could have no other complications. So beggars, 
tramps, asylum inmates, prisoners, queers, plain crackpots, 
and fallen women were definitely out. Yes sir, we’d cater 
only to pure and respectable alcoholics! Any others would 
surely destroy us. Besides, if we took in those odd ones, 
what would decent people say about us? We built a finemesh fence right around A.A.
“Maybe this sounds comical now. Maybe you think we 
oldtimers were pretty intolerant. But I can tell you there 
was nothing funny about the situation then. We were grim 
because we felt our lives and homes were threatened, and 
that was no laughing matter. Intolerant, you say? Well, we 
were frightened. Naturally, we began to act like most ev­
erybody does when afraid. After all, isn’t fear the true basis 
of intolerance? Yes, we were intolerant.”
How could we then guess that all those fears were to 
prove groundless? How could we know that thousands of 
these sometimes frightening people were to make aston­
ishing recoveries and become our greatest workers and 
* In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was changed to the General 
Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous, Inc., and the Foundation office is now 
the General Service Office.

T R A D I T I O N T H R E E
141
intimate friends? Was it credible that A.A. was to have a 
divorce rate far lower than average? Could we then fore­
see that troublesome people were to become our principal 
teachers of patience and tolerance? Could any then imag­
ine a society which would include every conceivable kind 
of character, and cut across every barrier of race, creed, 
politics, and language with ease?
Why did A.A. finally drop all its membership regula­
tions? Why did we leave it to each newcomer to decide him­
self whether he was an alcoholic and whether he should 
join us? Why did we dare to say, contrary to the experience 
of society and government everywhere, that we would nei­
ther punish nor deprive any A.A. of membership, that we 
must never compel anyone to pay anything, believe any­
thing, or conform to anything?
The answer, now seen in Tradition Three, was simplicity 
itself. At last experience taught us that to take away any 
alcoholic’s full chance was sometimes to pronounce his 
death sentence, and often to condemn him to endless mis­
ery. Who dared to be judge, jury, and executioner of his 
own sick brother?
As group after group saw these possibilities, they finally 
abandoned all membership regulations. One dramatic ex­
perience after another clinched this determination until it 
became our universal tradition. Here are two examples:
On the A.A. calendar it was Year Two. In that time noth­
ing could be seen but two struggling, nameless groups of 
alcoholics trying to hold their faces up to the light.
A newcomer appeared at one of these groups, knocked 
on the door and asked to be let in. He talked frankly with 

T R A D I T I O N T H R E E
142
that group’s oldest member. He soon proved that his was 
a desperate case, and that above all he wanted to get well. 
“But,” he asked, “will you let me join your group? Since I am 
the victim of another addiction even worse stigmatized 
than alcoholism, you may not want me among you. Or 
will you?”
There was the dilemma. What should the group do? The 
oldest member summoned two others, and in confidence 
laid the explosive facts in their laps. Said he, “Well, what 
about it? If we turn this man away, he’ll soon die. If we al­
low him in, only God knows what trouble he’ll brew. What 
shall the answer be—yes or no?”
At first the elders could look only at the objections. “We 
deal,” they said, “with alcoholics only. Shouldn’t we sacri­
fice this one for the sake of the many?” So went the discus­
sion while the newcomer’s fate hung in the balance. Then 
one of the three spoke in a very different voice. “What we 
are really afraid of,” he said, “is our reputation. We are 
much more afraid of what people might say than the trou­
ble this strange alcoholic might bring. As we’ve been talk­
ing, five short words have been running through my mind. 
Something keeps repeating to me, ‘What would the Master 
do?’” Not another word was said. What more indeed could 
be said?
Overjoyed, the newcomer plunged into Twelfth Step 
work. Tirelessly he laid A.A.’s message before scores of 
people. Since this was a very early group, those scores have 
since multiplied themselves into thousands. Never did he 
trouble anyone with his other difficulty. A.A. had taken its 
first step in the formation of Tradition Three.

T R A D I T I O N T H R E E
143
Not long after the man with the double stigma knocked 
for admission, A.A.’s other group received into its mem­
bership a salesman we shall call Ed. A power driver, this 
one, and brash as any salesman could possibly be. He had 
at least an idea a minute on how to improve A.A. These 
ideas he sold to fellow members with the same burning 
enthusiasm with which he distributed automobile polish. 
But he had one idea that wasn’t so salable. Ed was an athe­
ist. His pet obsession was that A.A. could get along better 
without its “God nonsense.” He browbeat everybody, and 
everybody expected that he’d soon get drunk—for at the 
time, you see, A.A. was on the pious side. There must be a 
heavy penalty, it was thought, for blasphemy. Distressingly 
enough, Ed proceeded to stay sober.
At length the time came for him to speak in a meeting. 
We shivered, for we knew what was coming. He paid a fine 
tribute to the Fellowship; he told how his family had been 
reunited; he extolled the virtue of honesty; he recalled the 
joys of Twelfth Step work; and then he lowered the boom. 
Cried Ed, “I can’t stand this God stuff! It’s a lot of malar­
key for weak folks. This group doesn’t need it, and I won’t 
have it! To hell with it!”
A great wave of outraged resentment engulfed the meet­
ing, sweeping every member to a single resolve: “Out he 
goes!”
The elders led Ed aside. They said firmly, “You can’t talk 
like this around here. You’ll have to quit it or get out.” 
With great sarcasm Ed came back at them. “Now do tell! 
Is that so?” He reached over to a bookshelf and took up 
a sheaf of papers. On top of them lay the foreword to the 

T R A D I T I O N T H R E E
144
book “Alcoholics Anonymous,” then under preparation. 
He read aloud, “The only requirement for A.A. member­
ship is a desire to stop drinking.” Relentlessly, Ed went on, 
“When you guys wrote that sentence, did you mean it, or 
didn’t you?”
Dismayed, the elders looked at one another, for they 
knew he had them cold. So Ed stayed.
Ed not only stayed, he stayed sober—month after month. 
The longer he kept dry, the louder he talked—against God. 
The group was in anguish so deep that all fraternal charity 
had vanished. “When, oh when,” groaned members to one 
another, “will that guy get drunk?”
Quite a while later, Ed got a sales job which took him out 
of town. At the end of a few days, the news came in. He’d 
sent a telegram for money, and everybody knew what that 
meant! Then he got on the phone. In those days, we’d go 
anywhere on a Twelfth Step job, no matter how unpromis­
ing. But this time nobody stirred. “Leave him alone! Let 
him try it by himself for once; maybe he’ll learn a lesson!”
About two weeks later, Ed stole by night into an A.A. 
member’s house and, unknown to the family, went to bed. 
Daylight found the master of the house and another friend 
drinking their morning coffee. A noise was heard on the 
stairs. To their consternation, Ed appeared. A quizzical 
smile on his lips, he said, “Have you fellows had your morn­
ing meditation?” They quickly sensed that he was quite in 
earnest. In fragments, his story came out.
In a neighboring state, Ed had holed up in a cheap hotel. 
After all his pleas for help had been rebuffed, these words 
rang in his fevered mind: “They have deserted me. I have 

T R A D I T I O N T H R E E
145
been deserted by my own kind. This is the end …nothing is 
left.” As he tossed on his bed, his hand brushed the bureau 
near by, touching a book. Opening the book, he read. It 
was a Gideon Bible. Ed never confided any more of what 
he saw and felt in that hotel room. It was the year 1938. He 
hasn’t had a drink since.
Nowadays, when oldtimers who know Ed foregather, 
they exclaim, “What if we had actually succeeded in throw­
ing Ed out for blasphemy? What would have happened to 
him and all the others he later helped?”
So the hand of Providence early gave us a sign that any 
alcoholic is a member of our Society when he says so.
TRADITION THREE — long form
Our membership ought to include all who suffer from al­
coholism. Hence we may refuse none who wish to recover. 
Nor ought A.A. membership ever depend upon money or 
conformity. Any two or three alcoholics gathered together 
for sobriety may call themselves an A.A. group, provided 
that, as a group, they have no other affiliation.