129
Tradition One
“Our common welfare should come first; per­
sonal recovery depends upon A.A. unity.”
THE unity of Alcoholics Anonymous is the most cher­
ished quality our Society has. Our lives, the lives of all to 
come, depend squarely upon it. We stay whole, or A.A. 
dies. Without unity, the heart of A.A. would cease to beat; 
our world arteries would no longer carry the life-giving 
grace of God; His gift to us would be spent aimlessly. Back 
again in their caves, alcoholics would reproach us and say, 
“What a great thing A.A. might have been!”
“Does this mean,” some will anxiously ask, “that in 
A.A. the individual doesn’t count for much? Is he to be 
dominated by his group and swallowed up in it?”
We may certainly answer this question with a loud “No!” 
We believe there isn’t a fellowship on earth which lavishes 
more devoted care upon its individual members; surely there 
is none which more jealously guards the individual’s right 
to think, talk, and act as he wishes. No A.A. can compel 
another to do anything; nobody can be punished or expelled. 
Our Twelve Steps to recovery are suggestions; the Twelve 
Traditions which guarantee A.A.’s unity contain not a 
single “Don’t.” They repeatedly say “We ought…” but nev­
er “You must!”
To many minds all this liberty for the individual spells 
sheer anarchy. Every newcomer, every friend who looks at 

T R A D I T I O N O N E
130
A.A. for the first time is greatly puzzled. They see liberty 
verging on license, yet they recognize at once that A.A. has 
an irresistible strength of purpose and action. “How,” they 
ask, “can such a crowd of anarchists function at all? How 
can they possibly place their common welfare first? What 
in Heaven’s name holds them together?”
Those who look closely soon have the key to this strange 
paradox. The A.A. member has to conform to the princi­
ples of recovery. His life actually depends upon obedience 
to spiritual principles. If he deviates too far, the penalty is 
sure and swift; he sickens and dies. At first he goes along 
because he must, but later he discovers a way of life he re­
ally wants to live. Moreover, he finds he cannot keep this 
priceless gift unless he gives it away. Neither he nor any­
body else can survive unless he carries the A.A. message. 
The moment this Twelfth Step work forms a group, another 
discovery is made—that most individuals cannot recover 
unless there is a group. Realization dawns that he is but a 
small part of a great whole; that no personal sacrifice is 
too great for preservation of the Fellowship. He learns that 
the clamor of desires and ambitions within him must be si­
lenced whenever these could damage the group. It becomes 
plain that the group must survive or the individual will not.
So at the outset, how best to live and work together as 
groups became the prime question. In the world about us 
we saw personalities destroying whole peoples. The strug­
gle for wealth, power, and prestige was tearing humanity 
apart as never before. If strong people were stalemated in 
the search for peace and harmony, what was to become of 
our erratic band of alcoholics? As we had once struggled 

T R A D I T I O N O N E
131
and prayed for individual recovery, just so earnestly did we 
commence to quest for the principles through which A.A. 
itself might survive. On anvils of experience, the structure 
of our Society was hammered out.
Countless times, in as many cities and hamlets, we reenacted the story of Eddie Rickenbacker and his courageous 
company when their plane crashed in the Pacific. Like us, 
they had suddenly found themselves saved from death, but 
still floating upon a perilous sea. How well they saw that 
their common welfare came first. None might become self­
ish of water or bread. Each needed to consider the others, 
and in abiding faith they knew they must find their real 
strength. And this they did find, in measure to transcend 
all the defects of their frail craft, every test of uncertainty, 
pain, fear, and despair, and even the death of one.
Thus has it been with A.A. By faith and by works we 
have been able to build upon the lessons of an incredible 
experience. They live today in the Twelve Traditions of Al­
coholics Anonymous, which—God willing—shall sustain 
us in unity for so long as He may need us.
TRADITION ONE — long form
Each member of Alcoholics Anonymous is but a small part 
of a great whole. A.A. must continue to live or most of us 
will surely die. Hence our common welfare comes first. But 
individual welfare follows close afterward.