183
Tradition Eleven
“Our public relations policy is based on attrac­
tion rather than promotion; we need always 
maintain personal anonymity at the level of 
press, radio, and films.”
WITHOUT its legions of well-wishers, A.A. could never 
have grown as it has. Throughout the world, immense 
and favorable publicity of every description has been the 
principal means of bringing alcoholics into our Fellow­
ship. In A.A. offices, clubs, and homes, telephones ring 
constantly. One voice says, “I read a piece in the news­
papers…”; another, “We heard a radio program…”; and 
still another, “We saw a moving picture…” or “We saw 
something about A.A. on television….” It is no exaggera­
tion to say that half of A.A.’s membership has been led to 
us through channels like these.
The inquiring voices are not all alcoholics or their fami­
lies. Doctors read medical papers about Alcoholics Anony­
mous and call for more information. Clergymen see articles 
in their church journals and also make inquiries. Employ­
ers learn that great corporations have set their approval 
upon us, and wish to discover what can be done about al­
coholism in their own firms.
Therefore, a great responsibility fell upon us to devel­
op the best possible public relations policy for Alcoholics 
Anonymous. Through many painful experiences, we think 

T R A D I T I O N E L E V E N
184
we have arrived at what that policy ought to be. It is the 
opposite in many ways of usual promotional practice. We 
found that we had to rely upon the principle of attraction 
rather than of promotion.
Let’s see how these two contrasting ideas—attraction 
and promotion—work out. A political party wishes to win 
an election, so it advertises the virtues of its leadership to 
draw votes. A worthy charity wants to raise money; forth­
with, its letterhead shows the name of every distinguished 
person whose support can be obtained. Much of the politi­
cal, economic, and religious life of the world is dependent 
upon publicized leadership. People who symbolize causes 
and ideas fill a deep human need. We of A.A. do not ques­
tion that. But we do have to soberly face the fact that being 
in the public eye is hazardous, especially for us. By tem­
perament, nearly every one of us had been an irrepressible 
promoter, and the prospect of a society composed almost 
entirely of promoters was frightening. Considering this ex­
plosive factor, we knew we had to exercise self-restraint.
The way this restraint paid off was startling. It result­
ed in more favorable publicity of Alcoholics Anonymous 
than could possibly have been obtained through all the 
arts and abilities of A.A.’s best press agents. Obviously, 
A.A. had to be publicized somehow, so we resorted to the 
idea that it would be far better to let our friends do this 
for us. Precisely that has happened, to an unbelievable 
extent. Veteran newsmen, trained doubters that they are, 
have gone all out to carry A.A.’s message. To them, we 
are something more than the source of good stories. On 
almost every newsfront, the men and women of the press 

T R A D I T I O N E L E V E N
185
have attached themselves to us as friends.
In the beginning, the press could not understand our re­
fusal of all personal publicity. They were genuinely baffled 
by our insistence upon anonymity. Then they got the point. 
Here was something rare in the world—a society which 
said it wished to publicize its principles and its work, but 
not its individual members. The press was delighted with 
this attitude. Ever since, these friends have reported A.A. 
with an enthusiasm which the most ardent members would 
find hard to match.
There was actually a time when the press of America 
thought the anonymity of A.A. was better for us than 
some of our own members did. At one point, about a hun­
dred of our Society were breaking anonymity at the pub­
lic level. With perfectly good intent, these folks declared 
that the principle of anonymity was horse-and-buggy 
stuff, something appropriate to A.A.’s pioneering days. 
They were sure that A.A. could go faster and farther if 
it availed itself of modern publicity methods. A.A., they 
pointed out, included many persons of local, national, 
or international fame. Provided they were willing—and 
many were—why shouldn’t their membership be publi­
cized, thereby encouraging others to join us? These were 
plausible arguments, but happily our friends of the writ­
ing profession disagreed with them.
The Foundation* wrote letters to practically every news 
outlet in North America, setting forth our public relations 
* In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was changed to the General 
Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous, Inc., and the Foundation office is now 
the General Service Office.

T R A D I T I O N E L E V E N
186
policy of attraction rather than promotion, and empha­
sizing personal anonymity as A.A.’s greatest protection. 
Since that time, editors and rewrite men have repeatedly 
deleted names and pictures of members from A.A. copy; 
frequently, they have reminded ambitious individuals of 
A.A.’s anonymity policy. They have even sacrificed good 
stories to this end. The force of their cooperation has cer­
tainly helped. Only a few A.A. members are left who delib­
erately break anonymity at the public level.
This, in brief, is the process by which A.A.’s Tradition 
Eleven was constructed. To us, however, it represents far 
more than a sound public relations policy. It is more than 
a denial of self-seeking. This Tradition is a constant and 
practical reminder that personal ambition has no place in 
A.A. In it, each member becomes an active guardian of 
our Fellowship.
TRADITION ELEVEN — long form
Our relations with the general public should be character­
ized by personal anonymity. We think A.A. ought to avoid 
sensational advertising. Our names and pictures as A.A. 
members ought not be broadcast, filmed, or publicly print­
ed. Our public relations should be guided by the principle 
of attraction rather than promotion. There is never need to 
praise ourselves. We feel it better to let our friends recom­
mend us.