168
Tradition Eight
“Alcoholics Anonymous should remain forever 
nonprofessional, but our service centers may 
employ special workers.”
ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS will never have a pro­
fessional class. We have gained some understanding of the 
ancient words “Freely ye have received, freely give.” We 
have discovered that at the point of professionalism, mon­
ey and spirituality do not mix. Almost no recovery from 
alcoholism has ever been brought about by the world’s best 
professionals, whether medical or religious. We do not de­
cry professionalism in other fields, but we accept the sober 
fact that it does not work for us. Every time we have tried 
to professionalize our Twelfth Step, the result has been ex­
actly the same: Our single purpose has been defeated.
Alcoholics simply will not listen to a paid twelfth-stepper. 
Almost from the beginning, we have been positive that faceto-face work with the alcoholic who suffers could be based 
only on the desire to help and be helped. When an A.A. talks 
for money, whether at a meeting or to a single newcomer, it 
can have a very bad effect on him, too. The money motive 
compromises him and everything he says and does for his 
prospect. This has always been so obvious that only a very 
few A.A.’s have ever worked the Twelfth Step for a fee.
Despite this certainty, it is nevertheless true that few sub­
jects have been the cause of more contention within our 

T R A D I T I O N E I G H T
169
Fellowship than professionalism. Caretakers who swept 
floors, cooks who fried hamburgers, secretaries in offices, 
authors writing books—all these we have seen hotly as­
sailed because they were, as their critics angrily remarked, 
“making money out of A.A.” Ignoring the fact that these 
labors were not Twelfth Step jobs at all, the critics attacked 
as A.A. professionals these workers of ours who were often 
doing thankless tasks that no one else could or would do. 
Even greater furors were provoked when A.A. members be­
gan to run rest homes and farms for alcoholics, when some 
hired out to corporations as personnel men in charge of the 
alcoholic problem in industry, when some became nurses 
on alcoholic wards, when others entered the field of alcohol 
education. In all these instances, and more, it was claimed 
that A.A. knowledge and experience were being sold for 
money, hence these people, too, were professionals.
At last, however, a plain line of cleavage could be seen 
between professionalism and nonprofessionalism. When 
we had agreed that the Twelfth Step couldn’t be sold for 
money, we had been wise. But when we had declared that 
our Fellowship couldn’t hire service workers nor could any 
A.A. member carry our knowledge into other fields, we 
were taking the counsel of fear, fear which today has been 
largely dispelled in the light of experience.
Take the case of the club janitor and cook. If a club is 
going to function, it has to be habitable and hospitable. 
We tried volunteers, who were quickly disenchanted with 
sweeping floors and brewing coffee seven days a week. 
They just didn’t show up. Even more important, an emp­
ty club couldn’t answer its telephone, but it was an open 

T R A D I T I O N E I G H T
170
invitation to a drunk on a binge who possessed a spare 
key. So somebody had to look after the place full time. If 
we hired an alcoholic, he’d receive only what we’d have to 
pay a nonalcoholic for the same job. The job was not to do 
Twelfth Step work; it was to make Twelfth Step work pos­
sible. It was a service proposition, pure and simple.
Neither could A.A. itself function without full-time 
workers. At the Foundation* and intergroup offices, we 
couldn’t employ nonalcoholics as secretaries; we had to 
have people who knew the A.A. pitch. But the minute we 
hired them, the ultraconservative and fearful ones shrilled, 
“Professionalism!” At one period, the status of these faith­
ful servants was almost unbearable. They weren’t asked to 
speak at A.A. meetings because they were “making money 
out of A.A.” At times, they were actually shunned by fel­
low members. Even the charitably disposed described them 
as “a necessary evil.” Committees took full advantage of 
this attitude to depress their salaries. They could regain 
some measure of virtue, it was thought, if they worked 
for A.A. real cheap. These notions persisted for years. 
Then we saw that if a hardworking secretary answered the 
phone dozens of times a day, listened to twenty wailing 
wives, arranged hospitalization and got sponsorship for 
ten newcomers, and was gently diplomatic with the irate 
drunk who complained about the job she was doing and 
how she was overpaid, then such a person could surely not 
be called a professional A.A. She was not professionaliz­
* In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was changed to the General 
Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous, Inc., and the Foundation office is now 
the General Service Office.

T R A D I T I O N E I G H T
171
ing the Twelfth Step; she was just making it possible. She 
was helping to give the man coming in the door the break 
he ought to have. Volunteer committeemen and assistants 
could be of great help, but they could not be expected to 
carry this load day in and day out.
At the Foundation, the same story repeats itself. Eight 
tons of books and literature per month do not package 
and channel themselves all over the world. Sacks of let­
ters on every conceivable A.A. problem ranging from a 
lonely-heart Eskimo to the growing pains of thousands of 
groups must be answered by people who know. Right con­
tacts with the world outside have to be maintained. A.A.’s 
lifelines have to be tended. So we hire A.A. staff members. 
We pay them well, and they earn what they get. They are 
professional secretaries,* but they certainly are not profes­
sional A.A.’s.
Perhaps the fear will always lurk in every A.A. heart that 
one day our name will be exploited by somebody for real 
cash. Even the suggestion of such a thing never fails to 
whip up a hurricane, and we have discovered that hurri­
canes have a way of mauling with equal severity both the 
just and the unjust. They are always unreasonable.
No individuals have been more buffeted by such emo­
tional gusts than those A.A.’s bold enough to accept em­
ployment with outside agencies dealing with the alcohol 
problem. A university wanted an A.A. member to educate 
the public on alcoholism. A corporation wanted a person­
* The work of present-day staff members has no counterpart among the job cat­
egories of commercial organizations. These A.A.’s bring a wide range of business 
and professional experience to their service at the General Service Office.

T R A D I T I O N E I G H T
172
nel man familiar with the subject. A state drunk farm want­
ed a manager who could really handle inebriates. A city 
wanted an experienced social worker who understood what 
alcohol could do to a family. A state alcohol commission 
wanted a paid researcher. These are only a few of the jobs 
which A.A. members as individuals have been asked to fill. 
Now and then, A.A. members have bought farms or rest 
homes where badly beat-up topers could find needed care. 
The question was—and sometimes still is—are such activi­
ties to be branded as professionalism under A.A. tradition?
We think the answer is “No. Members who select such 
full-time careers do not professionalize A.A.’s Twelfth 
Step.” The road to this conclusion was long and rocky. 
At first, we couldn’t see the real issue involved. In former 
days, the moment an A.A. hired out to such enterprises, 
he was immediately tempted to use the name Alcohol­
ics Anonymous for publicity or money-raising purposes. 
Drunk farms, educational ventures, state legislatures, and 
commissions advertised the fact that A.A. members served 
them. Unthinkingly, A.A.’s so employed recklessly broke 
anonymity to thump the tub for their pet enterprise. For 
this reason, some very good causes and all connected with 
them suffered unjust criticism from A.A. groups. More 
often than not, these onslaughts were spearheaded by the 
cry “Professionalism! That guy is making money out of 
A.A.!” Yet not a single one of them had been hired to do 
A.A.’s Twelfth Step work. The violation in these instances 
was not professionalism at all; it was breaking anonymity. 
A.A.’s sole purpose was being compromised, and the name 
of Alcoholics Anonymous was being misused.

T R A D I T I O N E I G H T
173
It is significant, now that almost no A.A. in our Fel­
lowship breaks anonymity at the public level, that nearly 
all these fears have subsided. We see that we have no right 
or need to discourage A.A.’s who wish to work as indi­
viduals in these wider fields. It would be actually antisocial 
were we to forbid them. We cannot declare A.A. such a 
closed corporation that we keep our knowledge and expe­
rience top secret. If an A.A. member acting as a citizen 
can become a better researcher, educator, personnel officer, 
then why not? Everybody gains, and we have lost nothing. 
True, some of the projects to which A.A.’s have attached 
themselves have been ill-conceived, but that makes not the 
slightest difference with the principle involved.
This is the exciting welter of events which has finally cast 
up A.A.’s Tradition of nonprofessionalism. Our Twelfth 
Step is never to be paid for, but those who labor in service 
for us are worthy of their hire.
TRADITION EIGHT — long form
Alcoholics Anonymous should remain forever nonpro­
fessional. We define professionalism as the occupation of 
counseling alcoholics for fees or hire. But we may employ 
alcoholics where they are going to perform those services 
for which we might otherwise have to engage nonalcohol­
ics. Such special services may be well recompensed. But 
our usual A.A. Twelfth Step work is never to be paid for.