Foreword
ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS is a worldwide fellow­
ship of more than one hundred thousand* alcoholic men 
and women who are banded together to solve their com­
mon problems and to help fellow sufferers in recovery from 
that age-old, baffling malady, alcoholism.
This book deals with the “Twelve Steps” and the “Twelve 
Traditions” of Alcoholics Anonymous. It presents an ex­
plicit view of the principles by which A.A. members re­
cover and by which their Society functions.
A.A.’s Twelve Steps are a group of principles, spiritual 
in their nature, which, if practiced as a way of life, can 
expel the obsession to drink and enable the sufferer to be­
come happily and usefully whole.
A.A.’s Twelve Traditions apply to the life of the Fellow­
ship itself. They outline the means by which A.A. main­
tains its unity and relates itself to the world about it, the 
way it lives and grows.
Though the essays which follow were written mainly for 
members, it is thought by many of A.A.’s friends that these 
pieces might arouse interest and find application outside 
A.A. itself.
Many people, nonalcoholics, report that as a result of 
the practice of A.A.’s Twelve Steps, they have been able to 
* In 2021, it is estimated that over two million have recovered through A.A.
15

F O R E W O R D
16
meet other difficulties of life. They think that the Twelve 
Steps can mean more than sobriety for problem drinkers. 
They see in them a way to happy and effective living for 
many, alcoholic or not.
There is, too, a rising interest in the Twelve Traditions 
of Alcoholics Anonymous. Students of human relations 
are beginning to wonder how and why A.A. functions as a 
society. Why is it, they ask, that in A.A. no member can be 
set in personal authority over another, that nothing like a 
central government can anywhere be seen? How can a set 
of traditional principles, having no legal force at all, hold 
the Fellowship of Alcoholics Anonymous in unity and ef­
fectiveness? The second section of this volume, though de­
signed for A.A.’s membership, will give such inquirers an 
inside view of A.A. never before possible.
Alcoholics Anonymous began in 1935 at Akron, Ohio, 
as the outcome of a meeting between a well-known sur­
geon and a New York broker. Both were severe cases of 
alcoholism and were destined to become co-founders of 
the A.A. Fellowship.
The basic principles of A.A., as they are known today, 
were borrowed mainly from the fields of religion and med­
icine, though some ideas upon which success finally de­
pended were the result of noting the behavior and needs of 
the Fellowship itself.
After three years of trial and error in selecting the most 
workable tenets upon which the Society could be based, 
and after a large amount of failure in getting alcoholics to 
recover, three successful groups emerged—the first at Ak­
ron, the second at New York, and the third at Cleveland. 

F O R E W O R D
17
Even then it was hard to find twoscore of sure recoveries 
in all three groups.
Nevertheless, the infant Society determined to set down 
its experience in a book which finally reached the public in 
April 1939. At this time the recoveries numbered about one 
hundred. The book was called “Alcoholics Anonymous,” 
and from it the Fellowship took its name. In it alcoholism 
was described from the alcoholic’s point of view, the spiri­
tual ideas of the Society were codified for the first time in 
the Twelve Steps, and the application of these Steps to the 
alcoholic’s dilemma was made clear. The remainder of the 
book was devoted to thirty stories or case histories in which 
the alcoholics described their drinking experiences and 
recoveries. This established identification with alcoholic 
readers and proved to them that the virtually impossible 
had now become possible. The book “Alcoholics Anony­
mous” became the basic text of the Fellowship, and it still is. 
This present volume proposes to broaden and deepen the 
understanding of the Twelve Steps as first written in the 
earlier work.
With the publication of the book “Alcoholics Anony­
mous” in 1939, the pioneering period ended and a pro­
digious chain reaction set in as the recovered alcoholics 
carried their message to still others. In the next years alco­
holics flocked to A.A. by tens of thousands, largely as the 
result of excellent and continuous publicity freely given by 
magazines and newspapers throughout the world. Clergy­
men and doctors alike rallied to the new movement, giving 
it unstinted support and endorsement.
This startling expansion brought with it very severe 

F O R E W O R D
18
growing pains. Proof that alcoholics could recover had 
been made. But it was by no means sure that such great 
numbers of yet erratic people could live and work together 
with harmony and good effect.
Everywhere there arose threatening questions of mem­
bership, money, personal relations, public relations, man­
agement of groups, clubs, and scores of other perplexities. 
It was out of this vast welter of explosive experience that 
A.A.’s Twelve Traditions took form and were first pub­
lished in 1946 and later confirmed at A.A.’s First Inter­
national Convention, held at Cleveland in 1950. The Tra­
dition section of this volume portrays in some detail the 
experience which finally produced the Twelve Traditions 
and so gave A.A. its present form, substance, and unity.
As A.A. now enters maturity, it has begun to reach into 
forty foreign lands.* In the view of its friends, this is but the 
beginning of its unique and valuable service.
It is hoped that this volume will afford all who read it a 
close-up view of the principles and forces which have made 
Alcoholics Anonymous what it is.
(A.A.’s General Service Office may be reached 
through our website, aa.org, or by writing:
Alcoholics Anonymous, P.O. Box 459,
Grand Central Station, New York, NY 10163. U.S.A.)
* In 2021, A.A. is established in approximately 180 countries.